An unprecedented die-off of sword ferns (Polystichum munitum) is
taking place in Seattle, within Seward Park's old growth forest.  The
death and decline of the sword fern - a species which dominates the
understory in Pacific coast lowland forests from Alaska to California -
is consequential for reasons both local and regional, both ecological
and humane.  

Seward Park's Magnficent Forest is located within one of the nation's
most diverse and dynamic neighborhoods, the 98118 zip code, home to
recent immigrants, to dozens of languages, and to residents of all
socioeconmic classes. This dynamic democratic human community is
enriched by the presence of the complex and ancient forest community
at Seward Park. Children, families and visitors of all stripes vist
the forest, enjoy its beauty, participate in summer camps, hike on the
trails, bicycle around its periphery, and learn of the natural world.
The forest is home to Seattle's oldest trees, to nesting eagles, to
trillium, occasional coyotes, woodpeckers and owls.  The health of the
forest community is thus intimately conjoined with the health and
happiness of the human community who lives nearby.  The sword fern
die-off tells us that the health of both communities is at risk.

The sword fern die-off may also have broad regional implications.  The
forest's urban setting brings heightened environmental stress above
and beyond the regional and global phenomena of recent drought and
higher temperatures, which also play a role in the die-off.  Urban
pollution and the possibility of novel pathogens introduced by large
numbers of human and canine visitors are two such candidate stressors.
These factors in combination may have led to the first appearance
of, and now provide incubation for, pathogens which could in the near
future spread beyond Seward Park.

By tending to the sword fern die-off, by comprehending its cause and
by possibly discovering remedies, we will be tending to the health of
our diverse human community, to the health of a rare urban old-growth
forest, and to forest health throughout the Pacific Northwest.


A mixed scientific and lay group of Seattle Parks ecologists, UW
researchers, WSU plant pathologists, and the Friends of Seward Park
has been studying the die-off since 2013, observing an accelerating
radial spread from the initial locus ("ground zero") at a rate of
about 10 meters per year, now covering two acres.  Self-funded field
and laboratory analyses have failed to identify a cause; the radial
spread suggests that pathogens are involved.

The Seward Park sword fern die-off is apparently unprecedented,
according to our consultations with Washington state plant
patholgists, and fern biologists of national stature (see appendix).
It is signficant in two ways.  First, it is a major disruption in the
health of a rare remnant of what was once more than a million acres of
lowland forest.  Seward Park's old growth "Magnficent Forest" is a
located in one of America's most diverse and dynamic neighborhoods.
The forest is host not only to bald eagles, pileated woodpeckers, owls
and coyotes, and to the oldest trees in Seattle, but to children and
families of all classes and races, to nature camps, religious groups
and university researchers, and to countless visitors who walk the
trails beneath towering trees.  Our community is stronger when
this forest is healthy.

In addition, the sword fern die-off may have regional implications.
Seward Park's urban setting brings heightened environmental stress
above and beyond the regional and global phenomena of recent drought
and higher temperatures.  Urban pollution and the possibility of novel
pathogens introduced by large numbers of human and canine visitors are
two such candidate stressors.  






A mixed scientific and lay group of Seattle Parks ecologists, UW
researchers, WSU plant pathologists, and the Friends of Seward Park
has been collaborating since 2013 to figure out the globally
unprecedented sword fern die-off. Sword ferns are dying in a radial
pattern, spreading from an initial locus at a rate of about 10 meters
per year. Formerly lush understory is now bare ground; 2% of the 100
acre forest has thus far been affected.

The sword fern die-off in Seward Park's Magnficent Forest deserves
close study above and beyond the informal, self-funded and volunteer
efforts of the last three years.  We propose a two-year project
guided by researchers from the University of Washington College
of the Environment employing laboratory methods, field experiments
and assays as described below.


The radial spread strongly suggests a
pathogenic cause.  The unprecedented die-off at Seward Park may be a
harbinger of impending regional spread, appearing here first due to
the heightened environmental stress associated wit urban setting
(above and beyond the effects of regional drought and higher
temperatures).  Urban pollution and novel pathogens, possibly
introduced by large numbers of human and canine visitors, are two such
candidate stressors.

Our three years of self-funded field and laboratory studies have
failed to identify a cause.  The radial spread strongly suggests a
pathogenic cause.  The unprecedented die-off at Seward Park may be a
harbinger of impending regional spread, appearing here first due to
the heightened environmental stress associated wit urban setting
(above and beyond the effects of regional drought and higher
temperatures).  Urban pollution and novel pathogens, possibly
introduced by large numbers of human and canine visitors, are two such
candidate stressors.


After Davis’s review:

A mixed lay/scientific group - Seattle Parks ecologists, UW
researchers, WSU plant pathologists, and the Friends of Seward Park -
is trying to figure out an unprecedented and alarming sword fern
(Polystichum munitum) die-off in the one hundred acre old-growth
forest in Seattle’s Seward Park.

(Scientific reports, a historical narrative, photos and videos may be
found here: http://sewardparkswordferndieoff.blogspot.com)

We had hoped to discover that the die-off, which begin in 2013, would
be self-limiting, a transient episode in the life of this old
forest. But the fern death continues, spreading radially at ~10m/yr,
and now affects > 2% of the forest. Lush understory of three years ago
is now bare ground.

The sword fern is the dominant understory species in Pacific Coast
lowland forests, from northern California to southeast Alaska. It is
famously hardy, resilient to both drought and disease.

Sword fern die-off has not been reported elsewhere in its range, nor
has it been seen in any related species, anywhere in the world.

Seward Park's Magnificent Forest is a rare remnant of what was once
more than a million acres of lowland forest. It has been a haven of
beauty and hope, an inspiring example of how we humans might live on
this planet: a wilderness forest flourishing in the midst of a
thriving cosmopolitan city.  The forest is within walking distance of
many heterogeneous communities, a broad ethnic and socioeconomic
mix. The forest is host not only to bald eagles, pileated woodpeckers,
owls and coyotes, and to the oldest trees in Seattle, but to children
of all classes, to nature camps and university researchers, and to
countless visitors who walk the trails beneath towering trees.

In the death of Seward Park's sword ferns, we likely see the effects
of climate change and globalization: newly introduced pests, or a new
imbalance among established and previously commensal species.

Even if we cannot reverse it, we can make good use of the sword fern
die-off.  We can study it methodically, in depth and with scientific
imagination in order to learn its causes, and perhaps to devise
remedies.

Through careful study and good reporting, we can draw attention to the
harm and loss occurring within this rare, complex and beautiful urban
forest, a local and compelling instance of the harm and loss taking
place broadly (and often remotely) on our planet.  We can cultivate
informed and detailed attention of the sort which may, in some
measure, and in small but important ways, bring home to us the need to
find new ways to live on the earth, new ways in which humans and
trees, woodpeckers, children and ferns, can all flourish together.